---
layout: default
title: Encumbrance
parent: The Rules of the Game
nav_order: 9
---

## 2.9.0 Encumbrance

Gear has encumbrance, measured in points, as exampled in the table below.
The more awkward or bulky the object, the greater the encumbrance.
The GM adjudicates ambiguous objects.

| Gear                                    |                              Encumbrance |
| --------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------: |
| Portable in a small pocket              | 0 (Any reasonable number can be carried) |
| Portable in one hand                    |                                        1 |
| Requires two hands to carry or use it   |                                        2 |
| Requires a whole-body effort to haul it |                                       5+ |
| Dragging an unconscious teammate        |                                       12 |

Gear is either Stowed or Readied.
Stowed gear is packed away carefully in pockets, packs, and harnesses.
It’s easier to carry but harder to quickly access.
Using Stowed gear requires that the bear er take a Main Action to pull it out before using it.
Readied gear is carried in hands, holsters, quick-access pockets, or other easily-accessible places.
It can be used as part of an action without any further preparation.

A character can carry a total number of Stowed encumbrance points equal to their Strength score.
They can carry a number of Readied points equal to half their Strength, rounded down.
Thus, a PC with a Strength score of 11 could carry 11 points of Stowed gear and 5 points of Readied.

PCs can haul much heavier objects if necessary.
If they push their limits for longer terms, they can carry an additional two Ready and four Stowed items.
The first time they do this, their Move speed is cut by 30%, from 30 feet to 20 feet.
The second time, it’s cut by 50%, from 20 feet to 10 feet.
More weight than this can’t be practically hauled over significant distances.

### 2.9.1 Bundled Gear

Small, regularly-shaped objects such as oil flasks, potion bottles, rations, and torches can be wrapped into bundles for easier portability.
Three such items can be tied into a bundle that only counts as one item of encumbrance.
Breaking into this bundle takes an extra Main Action, however.

### 2.9.2 Bulk Weights

Sometimes the PCs need to transport bulk amounts of goods that are measured in pounds.
When it’s necessary to convert these weights into encumbrance points, a GM can just assume that fifty pounds is worth about ten points of encumbrance to a PC hauling a pack out on their back.

When judging the ability of a vehicle to carry encumbrance points of cargo, it can be assumed that a wagon can carry as much as the PCs need it to carry, within reason.

### 2.9.3 Games Without Encumbrance

Not all groups like to track encumbrance or deal with the logistics of an adventuring expedition.
If the GM so elects, then PCs can carry and Ready whatever amount of gear the GM thinks is reasonable.
In such cases the GM should check over character sheets before each adventure to make sure reason is not outraged.
