---
layout: default
title: Overland Travel
parent: The Rules of the Game
nav_order: 11
---

## 2.11.0 Overland Travel

PCs can generally travel for ten hours a day in most seasons, the rest being absorbed in rest, camp construction, and incidental activities.
For each hour of travel they can cross as many miles of a given terrain as listed in the table.
This travel presumes that the PCs are moving directly toward their destination and not taking any particular time to scout the area for points of interest or investigate their surroundings.
This rate of travel also assumes average walking or wagon speeds; horses can be used by their riders for quick bursts of speed to chase or avoid others, but don’t increase the average travel rate much.

For every day of travel and every night of camping outdoors, the GM rolls one die for a wandering encounter check.
The die used will depend on the terrain, with safer or more peaceful lands using a larger die size.
On a 1, the PCs come upon creatures or a situation that requires their attention.

Assuming it’s not an ambush or a sudden encounter in an obscured area, the groups usually encounter each other at maximum sight range.
An opposed Wis/Notice check can be used to determine who spots who first; PCs who get the edge can usually avoid the other group automatically if they have sufficient cover.

PCs traveling with a caravan or riding a well-stocked travel wagon need not concern themselves with details of food, drink, and shelter, but PCs who plan on making an overland expedition without these ready comforts should consult the rules for overland exploration for details on the supplies and difficulties involved.

| Terrain Type                          | Miles per Hour |
| ------------------------------------- | -------------: |
| Plains or savannas                    |              3 |
| Light forest or desert                |              2 |
| Dense forest or rugged hills 1.       |              5 |
| Swamp or marsh                        |              1 |
| Mountains or dire wastelands          |            0.5 |
| There is a road through the terrain x |            2\* |
| Foul weather, mud, or heavy rain      |           x0.5 |
| Deep snow on the ground               |           x0.1 |

\* Good roads cannot increase the party’s marching speed above three miles per hour.

### 2.11.1 Sea Travel

A ship can usually manage about six miles an hour of travel when under sail, and can sail around the clock if far from coasts and other perils.
Oar-powered galleys average the same speed, but are heed less of the winds.
An ordinary crew can only row for eight hours a day, however.

Encounters at sea are rarer but potentially more hazardous; the GM should roll daily and nightly checks on 1d10 or 1d12.
On a 1, some creature has come across the ship, a troublesome wind or storm has sprung up, something has been damaged on the ship or gone awry with the crew, or otherwise complicated the vessel’s journey.
Some such encounters can be overcome with a good plan and a decent Sail skill check, while others may require bloodier answers.
