---
layout: default
title: Combat
parent: The Rules of the Game
nav_order: 4
---

## 2.4.0 Combat

Violence is inevitable in most fantasy campaigns.
The rules below handle its most common manifestations.

### 2.4.1 The Combat Sequence

When combat begins, the fight progresses in the following sequence.
The sections below explain each step in the process.

First, each participating side rolls for initiative.
The side that rolled highest acts first.

Second, each member of a side gets to take their actions.
Members of a side act in whatever order they wish.
NPC sides act in whatever order the GM wishes.

Third, once every member of a side has acted, the side that rolled next-highest gets to act.
If NPCs have taken losses or are facing defeat, they may need to roll a Morale check as explained in section 5.2.0.
PCs never check Morale.

Fourth, once every side has acted the process repeats from the top in the same order.
Initiative is not re-rolled.

### 2.4.2 Combat Initiative

When combat begins, each side involved in it rolls initiative, rolling 1d8 and adding their group’s best Dexterity modifier.
NPCs usually add nothing.
The groups then act in order from highest to lowest rolls, with PC sides winning ties.
When the slowest group has acted, the round ends and a new round starts in the same initiative order.
Members of a side can act in any order the group agrees upon when it is that side’s turn to act, performing their allowed actions as explained in the section below.

#### 2.4.2.1 Individual Initiative

As an optional rule, the GM may use individual initiative.
In this case, each combatant rolls 1d8 individually, adding their Dexterity modifier, and acting in order from highest to lowest with PCs winning ties.
This leaves a group less likely to be caught flat-footed by enemies, but makes it harder for a group to coordinate actions.

#### 2.4.2.2 Surprise

If a group is caught entirely unawares they may suffer surprise, automatically granting their enemies a full free round of action be fore initiative can be rolled.
The GM decides when surprise applies, possibly calling for an opposed Dex/Sneak skill check versus the target’s Wis/Notice.
Groups cannot be surprised if they are actively anticipating the possibility of combat; at most, they might suffer an initiative penalty at the GM’s discretion.

#### 2.4.2.3 Automatic Initiative Powers

A PC with certain Foci or abilities may be immune to surprise or gain automatic initiative.
In such cases they automatically act first during a combat round, even if the rest of their side is slower.
If multiple combatants have these powers, they roll initiative normally amongst themselves to see which of them acts first.

### 2.4.3 Combat Action Types

Attacks, movement, spellcasting, and other combat activities all re quire one of the following four types of actions.

**Main actions** are a character’s primary action during a combat round, such as attacking an enemy, applying first aid to a downed ally, casting a spell, frantically evading incoming spears, or something else that takes less than six seconds to do.
A combatant gets one Main action per round.

**Move actions** involve moving the character’s normal movement rate of 30 feet or performing some other relatively brief bodily action, such as getting up from prone.
A combatant gets one Move action per round, but can spend their main action to get a second.

**On Turn actions** are brief, simple acts that require only a moment’s concentration.
Activating certain abilities or speaking a few words might constitute an On Turn action.
A character can take as many On Turn actions on their round as the GM finds plausible.

**Instant actions** are special, most being provided only by certain powers or certain special actions.
Instant actions can be performed even when it’s not your turn in the round, even after the dice have already been rolled.
The Veteran’s Luck class ability provides one such Instant action, allowing the PC to treat a missed attack roll as an automatic hit.
A PC can use as many Instant actions in a round as the GM finds plausible.
Instant actions performed at the same time are resolved simultaneously, with the GM adjudicating any ambiguities.

### 2.4.4 Common Combat Actions

The actions listed below are merely some of the most common taken in combat.

**Make a Melee Attack (Main Action)**: Attack a target in melee range with an unarmed attack or melee weapon.
Such weapons use either the Punch or the Stab skill, depending on the type of attack.

**Make a Ranged Attack (Main Action)**: Attack a target with a bow or thrown weapon.
The Shoot skill is used for these attacks, though Stab or Exert can optionally be used for thrown weapons.
If there is an enemy attacker in melee range, one-handed ranged weapons and thrown weapons suffer a -4 penalty to hit, while bows and other two-handed ranged weapons cannot be fired at all.

**Make a Snap Attack (Instant Action)**: As an Instant action, give up your Main Action and either Make a Melee Attack or Make a Ranged Attack at a -4 penalty to hit.
As an Instant action, you can Make a Snap Attack even when it’s not your turn, but you must not have taken your Main Action this round yet.
Only well-trained and disciplined NPCs have enough focus to Make a Snap Attack.

**Make a Swarm Attack (Main Action)**: Target an enemy within range of your weapon and take this action until up to four allies have Made a Swarm Attack on that target this round.
At that point or any point beforehand, one of these assailants can Make a Melee Attack or Make a Ranged Attack on the target with a +2 bonus to hit and +1 bonus to damage for every other assailant, up to a maximum bonus of +6 to hit and +3 damage.
This bonus damage does not add to the attack’s Shock and cannot make it do more than its usual maximum damage.
Any Shock inflicted by this attack is always applicable, however, even if the target’s AC is too high, they’re using a shield, or have some power that makes them immune to Shock; the damage a Swarm Attack does isn’t really Shock, but a reflection of the inevitable hazards of being swarmed by numerous armed foes.

**Charge (Special Action)**: Spend both your Main Action and your Move action to move up to twice your normal movement rate in a straight line, making a melee or thrown ranged attack at the end of it with a +2 bonus to hit.
You must be able to charge at least 3 meters to build up sufficient momentum and you suffer a -2 penalty to your Armor Classes until the end of the round.

**Screen an Ally (Move Action)**: Move up to your normal movement rate to get adjacent to an ally.
You then physically block attacks against them until the start of your next turn, provided they remain within 3 meters of you.
Enemies who attack your ward must make a successful opposed combat skill check against you using either Str or Dex and the most applicable combat skill.
If the enemy succeeds, their attack targets your ward normally.
If you succeed, their attack instead targets you.
You can screen against a number of attackers each round equal to your highest combat skill; thus, you need at least level-1 in a combat skill to successfully screen.
Multiple defenders can screen the same target, in which case the opposed skill check is compared to all defenders and targets the worst-rolling successful defender.
You can only screen against attacks you could feasibly physically parry or body-block.

**Total Defense (Instant Action)**: Give up your Main Action to focus entirely on dodging and evading incoming perils.
Your Melee and Ranged Armor Classes increase by +2 and you become immune to Shock until the start of your next turn, including the otherwise-unavoidable damage from a Swarm Attack.
You cannot take this action if you have already spent your Main Action for the round.

**Run (Move Action)**: Move your normal movement rate in combat, which is 30 feet for an ordinary human.
If you start your movement adjacent to an armed melee combatant, they get a free melee attack against you as you flee.
To avoid this, you must make a Fighting Withdrawal first.

**Make a Fighting Withdrawal (Main Action)**: Disengage from an adjacent melee attacker, allowing you to move away from them without incurring a free attack as you retreat.
You do not actually leave melee range with this action alone, and your enemy can simply re-engage you next round if you don’t actually take a move action to retreat.

**Use a Skill (Main Action)**: Perform first aid on a downed comrade, cry out an appeal for parley, or otherwise use a skill that wouldn’t normally take more than six seconds.

**Ready or Stow an Item (Main Action)**: A character can Ready an item for use from their pack or stowage or Stow it, as per the encumbrance rules.
Sheathing or holstering a Readied weapon without actually Stowing it does not require this action, though the GM may disallow rapid weapon swaps if they start to become implausible.

**Reload a Weapon (Main Action)**: Reload a crossbow from a Readied case of quarrels.
Bows and crossbows may be reloaded as an On Turn action if the shooter has at least Shoot-1 skill; otherwise it’s a Move action to nock a new arrow in a bow.

**Drop an Item (Instant Action)**: Drop an item you are holding.
This may be done at any time to free up a hand.

**Pick up an Item (Move Action)**: Scoop up a dropped item within melee range, leaving it Readied in your hand.

**Stand Up (Move Action)**: Rise from a prone position, picking up any dropped items as you do so.

**Go Prone (On Turn Action)**: Fall prone, applying a -2 penalty to ranged attacks against you and a +2 bonus to melee-range attacks against you.
Your normal movement rate is halved while you remain prone.

**Hold An Action (Move Action)**: Spend your Move action to delay acting on your side’s turn.
You may trigger the rest of your turn’s actions as an Instant action at any point until the end of the round, after which they are lost.
If your held action is taken in response to someone else’s action, yours resolves first.

### 2.4.5 Combat Attack Rolls

When an assailant makes an attack, they roll 1d20 and add their base attack bonus, the weapon’s relevant attribute modifier, and their relevant combat skill level.
If they lack even level-0 in the appropriate combat skill, they apply a -2 penalty to the roll.
If the total is equal or greater than the target’s relevant Melee or Ranged Armor Class, they hit.
If less, they miss.

Every weapon listed in the equipment section is listed as using one or more attributes, such as either Str or Dex for a dagger.
The attacker may choose either attribute for modifying the weapon’s attack and damage rolls.

#### 2.4.5.1 NPC Attack Rolls

NPCs usually do not have attribute modifiers or skill levels.
Instead, the attack bonus of a trained NPC combatant is usually equal to their hit dice, often with an additional bonus to reflect particularly good training or talent.

#### 2.4.5.2 Attack Roll Modifiers

Some common situations can modify an attack roll, granting a bonus or penalty.
GMs may add others depending on the situation.

| Situation                                                                                   | Mod |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --: |
| Shooting at a distant prone foe                                                             |  -2 |
| Attacking an adjacent prone foe                                                             |  +2 |
| Melee attacking while prone                                                                 |  -4 |
| Your target is past your bow or thrown weapon’s normal range, up to its maximum long range. |  -2 |
| The target is at least half behind cover                                                    |  -2 |
| The target is almost completely in cover                                                    |  -4 |
| Making a thrown attack while in melee                                                       |  -4 |
| Throwing a weapon while in melee                                                            |  -4 |
| Shooting a bow or crossbow while in melee                                                   | N/A |
| You are shooting at a target you can’t see but you know where they are.                     |  -4 |
| You are shooting at a target you can’t see and don’t know their exact position.             | N/A |

### 2.4.6 Damage and Shock

If an attack hits, it inflicts hit point damage equal to the weapon’s damage die plus the weapon’s relevant attribute modifier.
Special weapon mods or abilities may increase this damage.

#### 2.4.6.1 Non-Lethal Damage

You may attack non-lethally with an appropriate weapon or unarmed attack.
Your attacks will only incapacitate the target if you reduce them to zero hit points.

#### 2.4.6.2 Punch Weapon Damage

If you are making a purely unarmed attack you may add your Punch skill to the damage.
You may not add the skill to the damage done by artificial weaponry that uses the Punch skill.

#### 2.4.6.3 Trauma

Trauma Dice are optional in the typical fantasy setting of this game, though GMs may choose to use them if they wish to further increase the peril of combat.
Statistics for weapon Trauma Dice and armor Trauma Target improvements are given in the Cities Without Number SRD.

If you use this rule, then when you hit with a weapon or lethally-intended unarmed attack, roll the weapon’s associated Trauma Die.
If it equals or exceeds the victim’s Trauma Target, which is usually 6 for a normal unarmored human, you have inflicted a Traumatic Hit.

Traumatic Hits multiply the total damage of the hit by the weapon’s listed Trauma Rating.
Thus, if a shotgun with a x3 Trauma Rating would normally have done 9 damage in total, it instead does 27.
If this damage or any later damage in the same fight reduces the victim to zero hit points, they risk a Major Injury.

Some abilities or heavy armor may increase a subject’s Trauma Target.
Some other abilities might grant a bonus to the Trauma Die roll.
To speed the process, it’s generally best to roll the Trauma Die at the same time as the attack or damage roll.

Vehicles and other inanimate objects are immune to Traumatic Hits from weapons that could not reasonably inflict catastrophic structural damage on them.

#### 2.4.6.4 Shock

Some melee weapons inflict Shock on a missed attack roll.
This dam age reflects the inevitable harm a poorly-armored combatant suffers when engaging in armed combat.
Shock for a weapon is recorded as a point value and target Armor Class, such as “Shock 2/15”.
If the wielder misses a target with this weapon that has a Melee Armor Class equal or less than the weapon’s Shock rating, they suffer the listed amount of damage anyway.
Thus, if that weapon were to miss a victim with Melee AC 13, it would still do 2 points of damage.

Some attacks apply Shock on a miss regardless of the target’s Armor Class.
This benefit may be granted by certain abilities, or it may be part of a dangerous NPC’s talents.
Such Shock ratings are recorded with “-” as the affected AC, such as “Shock 5/-”.
This automatic Shock is still negated by shields or abilities that grant a subject immunity to Shock.

The only modifiers that add to Shock damage are the wielder’s relevant attribute modifier for the weapon and any damage bonuses that explicitly add to Shock.
Thus, the Killing Blow class ability adds to Shock because it specifically says so, while a weapon mod that merely says it adds +2 damage would not.

A person using a shield can ignore the first source of Shock they would normally suffer in a round.
Some other Foci or special actions such as Total Defense can also render a subject immune to Shock.

An attack that hits can never do less damage than the Shock that would have been inflicted on a miss.
If using the Trauma rules, dam age inflicted by Shock cannot cause a Traumatic Hit.

### 2.4.7 Special Combat Maneuvers

There are certain special maneuvers or activities that commonly arise in combat.

#### 2.4.7.1 Shoving and Grappling

To shove a target the attacker must make a successful melee attack.
This attack does no damage, but forces an opposed Str/Exert or Str/Punch skill check.
If the attacker wins, the target is shoved back up to 3 meters or knocked prone at the attacker’s discretion.

To grapple, the attacker must make a successful unarmed melee attack while having both hands free.
This attack does no damage but forces an opposed Str/Punch skill check.
If the attacker wins, the victim is grappled.
A grappled victim remains so until they take a Main Action to perform a successful opposed Str/Punch skill check against their assailant.

While grappled, neither the assailant or the target can move from their location, nor can they fight with anything but unarmed attacks, including fangs or claws for creatures equipped with such.
At the end of each round, a grappled victim automatically suffers damage as if hit by their assailant’s unarmed attack.

If the attacker wishes to move the grappled target, they must spend a Main Action and make an opposed Str/Punch skill check.
On a success, they move the target up to 10 feet along with them or throw them 5 feet and leave them prone.
On a loss or tie, the target escapes.

An attacker can grapple only one target at a time, but a defend er can be grappled by multiple assailants, within reason.
Any skill checks forced on a multiply-grappled target are compared against all assailants, and win only if all assailant rolls are beaten.

These rules assume both assailant and target are relatively human-sized.
Grappling or shoving humanoid but substantially larger targets is done with a -2 penalty on all skill checks, while trying to handle quadrupeds or those only barely plausible to wrestle is done at a -4 penalty.

#### 2.4.7.2 Dual-Wielding Weapons

Some attackers prefer to use two weapons at once.
PCs who wish to do so must have at least level-1 in the relevant weapon skills, such as Stab-1 and Shoot-1 for dual-wielding a knife and hand crossbow.

When making an attack while dual-wielding, the attacker chooses which weapon they wish to use, rolling the attack roll accordingly.
On a hit, the weapon does +2 damage so long as the target is within range of both wielded weapons.
This bonus does not add to Shock.

Managing two weapons at once is difficult, and applies a -1 penalty to all hit rolls.

#### 2.4.7.3 Execution Attacks

A target that is entirely unsuspecting of danger is subject to execution attacks.
A subject that is expecting danger or alert to potential harm cannot be targeted by an execution attack.

A ranged execution attack requires one full minute of aiming, waiting, and adjusting on the part of the would-be sniper.
Any disturbance during this time will spoil the shot.
After spending this time, the assassin may make a Dex/Shoot skill check.
The difficulty is 6 for an attack within two meters, 8 for an attack within the weapon’s normal range, or 10 for one at the weapon’s long range.
On a success, the attack hits; the victim’s Armor Class is ignored.

A melee execution attack requires one full minute of near proximity to the target, watching for just the right opening and getting to within melee range of the victim.
If this time is granted, the assassin may make a melee attack, automatically hitting.

When a target is hit with an execution attack they must make a Physical saving throw at a penalty equal to the assailant’s combat skill.
On a failure, they are immediately reduced to zero hit points and Mortally Wounded, or knocked unconscious if the weapon was non-lethal.

If they succeed on the save, they still take maximum damage from the hit.
If using the Trauma rules, damage is rolled normally but successful execution attacks always count as Traumatic Hits, so the ensuing multiplied damage or Major Injury may be enough to kill in of itself.
