---
layout: default
title: Preparing and Casting Spells
parent: Magic and Spellcasting
nav_order: 2
---

## 4.2.0 Preparing and Casting Spells

Each spellcaster must first learn a spell before they can cast it.
They may be taught by a mage who already knows the spell, even if they’re from a different tradition, or they must find a grimoire laying out the fine details of the incantation.
Specialist spells specific to a tradition cannot be learned by mages outside that tradition.

### 4.2.1 Learning a Spell

Learning a spell requires one week per spell level, less one week per level of the learner’s Magic skill, down to a minimum of one day.
At the end of this time the student will either have mastered the contents of a written copy of the spell or created such a copy from their master’s tutelage.
They must continue to retain access to this written document if they are to prepare the spell later, as it is an actual thaumaturgically-attuned artifact in itself.
Without its formulas, attunement tables, and enchanted diagrams the mage will be unable to prepare the spell for later use.
The full collection of these documents is generally known as the mage’s “grimoire” or “spellbook”, though some texts actually take the form of teaching artifacts or physical models.

If this spellbook is lost, the mage can re-create it, but it takes as much time to re-scribe each spell as it would to learn it in the first place.
No special costs are required in silver or materials.

A mage must be able to actually cast the spell in order to learn it.
A novice mage can cast only first level spells, so they can learn only first level spells as well, even if they somehow come into possession of a grimoire with a more potent incantation.
They’ll need to wait until their own enlightenment is sufficient to cast the spell before they can finally master it.

### 4.2.2 Preparing a Spell

Once the spellbook is prepared, the mage must perform the necessary attunements and propitiations to prepare the spell for casting.
The number of spells a mage can prepare at once varies with their experience level, from as few as two or three at first level to as many as twelve when at tenth level.
The mage may prepare any spell they have in their spellbook; there’s no obligation to prepare a certain number of low-level spells should the mage wish to fill all their avail able “slots” with their most powerful magics and run the risk of lacking some lesser, yet more useful spell.

Preparing a new set of spells takes an hour, and can only be done after a good night’s rest, when the mage’s mind is most fresh and malleable.
Once spells have been prepared they remain so indefinitely until replaced with a different set of magics.

### 4.2.3 Casting Prepared Spells

Once a set of spells is prepared, the mage may then cast them at their leisure.
Casting a spell usually requires a Main Action and at least one free hand, along with vocalizations at least as loud as clear normal conversation.
The arcane gesticulations and vocal incantations are quite obviously occult to any onlookers, but it’s usually impossible to tell which spell a mage is casting merely by looking at them.

Casting a spell requires focus and undisturbed concentration.
If a mage has taken hit point damage or has been severely jostled in a round, they cannot cast magic that round.
Thus, a mage who acts late in a round runs the risk of being hurt and having their concentration spoiled, thus forcing them to do something other than cast a spell when their turn comes around.

Spells cannot normally be cast while wearing armor or restrictive clothing.
The profane materials, restrictive fit, and unsalutary occult configurations of armor spoil the necessary flow of energy, as does the bulk and clumsiness of a shield.
The same hindrances usually also spoil the use of any arts the tradition may teach, and not just spellcasting itself.

A mage can cast only so many spells each day before needing a full night’s rest to recover.
Novices can cast only one spell, while masters can manage six.
The spell to be cast may be selected from any prepared by the mage; the same power can be used to invoke a mighty fifth-level spell or a relatively modest first-level incantation.
The same spell may be cast more than once, if the mage has multiple castings left for the day.

Adventurers who take the Partial Mage class are more limited than more focused specialists.
They are able to cast fewer spells each day and the maximum level of spell they can cast is also significantly lower as compared to an equivalent full Mage.
The total spells they can prepare for the day are also often somewhat fewer than that of a full Mage.
When they cast the spells, however, any level-based effects also use their full level, so a third-level Partial Necromancer’s invocation of The Coruscating Coffin does 3d8 damage, just as a full Necromancer would.

### 4.2.4 Creatures, Targets, and Visibility

Many spells or powers specify particular targets or creatures, or re quire that a target be visible.
For purposes of these spells, “creature” means any animate entity, whether living, undead, or synthetic.
Plants do not qualify as creatures unless they’re some sort of plant monster.

A spell that can be aimed or used on one or more targets can include the caster as one such potential target, unless the spell indicates otherwise.
If a spell specifies that it applies only to “chosen targets”, the mage can pick and choose; otherwise all in the area are affected indiscriminately.

A “visible” target is a target the mage can see or whose exact location is obvious to the caster.
If a maximum range isn’t given, assume it’s can be no more than a bowshot away from the wizard.
