---
layout: default
title: Magic Items and Enchanted Treasures
parent: Magic and Spellcasting
nav_order: 9
---

## 4.9 Magic Items and Enchanted Treasures

Statting out specific magic items is left as an exercise for the reader.
Certain particular types of items do exist, however.

### 4.9.1 Scrolls

Some scrolls, tablets, or other objects can be imbued with one or more spells by wizards who craft them.
Each spell in a scroll can be used only once.
A user must grasp the item firmly and spend a Main Action, wasting the spell if they are struck or otherwise disturbed during the action.
The spell is then cast, with details of targeting and focus determined by the user.

Releasing a scroll safely requires a clear understanding of its magic.
A user must have a Magic skill no more than one less than the suspended spell’s level in order to safely trigger it.
If a wielder doesn’t have a high enough Magic skill, they can attempt to use the item anyway, albeit at considerable risk.
An Int/Magic or Cha/Magic skill check is needed against a difficulty of 8 plus the spell level.
If it fails by one or two points, the spell fizzles and is wasted.
If it fails by more than two points, it goes off, but at the wrong target or with the wrong effect at the GM’s discretion.
If the check succeeds, the spell goes off as intended.

Spellcasters can create their own scrolls for later use, creating them as single-use items.
The expense is 1,000 silver per spell level, and the difficulty is 7 plus half the spell level, rounded up.
While a scroll takes only a week to inscribe, the process is exhausting, and a wizard can do it no more than once a week per spell level inscribed.

### 4.9.2 Potions

Some magical effects can be contained in an ounce or two of liquid, oil, incense, or other consumable substance.
Using a potion requires that it be Readied and a Main Action be used to consume it.

**Apprehending the Arcane Form** can give a one-sentence description of the potion’s intended effect.
Touching a single drop of the fluid against a user’s tongue can sometimes give a hint as well, with a tiny flicker of its effect impressed on the user.
Aside from these, someone with the Magic skill can spend a full day in careful analysis of the potion, rolling Wis/Magic or Int/Magic against the potion’s creation difficulty to identify its purpose.
A given investigator can make only one attempt to identify it.

Wizards can create potions as single-use magic items, with the base cost and difficulty varying depending on the nature of the potion’s effect.

### 4.9.3 Magic Weapons and Armor

Magical weapons and armor have a bonus, usually +1, but some times as great as +3.
This bonus adds directly to the hit roll, damage roll, and Shock of weapons, while it adds to the base Armor Class of armor.
Some weapons and armor have additional special abilities.

Magical shields with special powers do exist, but shields do not get numeric bonuses as armor does.

### 4.9.4 Magical Devices

Enchanted wands, magic boots, ensorceled cloaks, and other devices of magic are rare, but do exist.
These items usually require a Main Action to trigger any active abilities they grant, while passive benefits are automatically granted to the wielder.

Most magical devices are permanent, but wands, rods, and staves often have a limited number of charges.
It is usually prohibitively difficult to recharge such devices.
