---
layout: default
title: Backgrounds
parent: Character Creation
nav_order: 3
---

## 1.3.0 Backgrounds

Every character has a Background, a past reflecting their career before they took up adventuring.
A background may be chosen from the list below or a new one made up with GM permission.

### 1.3.1 Background Skills

When a Background is chosen, a PC immediately gets its free skill at level-0.
At that point, the player decides whether to gain further skills randomly or to pick specific choices.

If they choose randomly, they may make three rolls divided be tween the Growth and Learning tables of their background in any way they wish, including taking all three from just one table.
If they pick specific choices they can pick any two skills from the Learning table, including picking the same one twice to raise it to level-1.
They may not pick the “Any Skill” option, if it exists.

A skill pick of “Any Combat” means the player can pick Shoot, Stab, or Punch.
A skill roll of “Any Skill” means they can pick any skill from the list above.
Some campaigns may involve special magical or psychic skills; these cannot be chose with the Any Skill pick.

If an attribute bonus is rolled, such as “+2 Physical”, the player may apply it to any physical attribute or split the bonus between two physical attributes.
The same principle applies to Mental attribute increases. “Any Stat” increases may be applied to either physical or mental attributes.
No attribute can be raised above 18.

### 1.3.2 New Backgrounds

To create a new background, the player describes it to the GM and picks an existing background table that best fits the concept.
Assuming the GM approves it, they may then roll or pick as usual.
If no existing background table fits, they may make a new one with the GM’s permission.

### 1.3.3 Example Backgrounds

The two following backgrounds are examples of those possible for a player, with others to be created as the designer thinks appropriate for their setting.
The free granted skill is listed after each background’s name.

| Artisan |             | Craft |            |
| ------- | ----------- | ----- | ---------- |
| d6      | _Growth_    | d8    | _Learning_ |
| 1       | +1 Any Stat | 1     | Connect    |
| 2       | +2 Physical | 2     | Convince   |
| 3       | +2 Physical | 3     | Craft      |
| 4       | +2 Mental   | 4     | Craft      |
| 5       | Exert       | 5     | Exert      |
| 6       | Any Skill   | 6     | Know       |
|         |             | 7     | Notice     |
|         |             | 8     | Trade      |

| Barbarian |             | Survive |            |
| --------- | ----------- | ------- | ---------- |
| d6        | _Growth_    | d8      | _Learning_ |
| 1         | +1 Any Stat | 1       | Any Combat |
| 2         | +2 Physical | 2       | Connect    |
| 3         | +2 Physical | 3       | Exert      |
| 4         | +2 Mental   | 4       | Lead       |
| 5         | Exert       | 5       | Notice     |
| 6         | Any Skill   | 6       | Punch      |
|           |             | 7       | Sneak      |
|           |             | 8       | Survive    |
