---
layout: default
title: Attributes
parent: Character Creation
nav_order: 1
---

## 1.1.0 Attributes

A character has six attributes ranging from 3 to 18, reflecting a range from the minimum viable capacity for a playable character to the maximum normal human level.

Three of these attributes are physical.

- **Strength**, reflecting physical prowess, melee combat, carrying gear, and brute force.
- **Dexterity**, reflecting speed, evasion, manual dexterity, reaction time, and combat initiative.
- **Constitution**, reflecting hardiness, enduring injury, and tolerating large amounts of magical healing.

Three are mental attributes.

- **Intelligence**, reflecting memory, reasoning, technical skills, and general education.
- **Wisdom**, reflecting noticing things, making judgments, reading situations, and intuition.
- **Charisma**, reflecting commanding, charming, attracting attention, and being taken seriously.

NPCs do not normally have attributes. If necessary, the GM can choose them as appropriate, but usually they are assumed to have average scores if it’s ever relevant.

### 1.1.1 Generating Attributes

To generate their six attributes, the player rolls 3d6 in order, once for each attribute.
At any point before section 1.5.0 in character creation the player may substitute a score of 14 for one rolled score.

Optionally, a player may choose to assign their stats from the following array of numbers: 14, 12, 11, 10, 9, and 7, divided up as desired among the attributes.
If an array is used a score may not be substituted with a 14 later.

### 1.1.2 Attribute Modifiers

Each attribute has a modifier, usually ranging from -2 to +2.
This modifier is added to skill checks, attack rolls, damage rolls, Shock damage, and the relevant saving throw targets.

An attribute score of 3 has a modifier of -2.
A score of 4-7 has a modifier of -1.
A score of 8-13 has a modifier of +0.
A score of 14-17 has a modifier of +1.
A score of 18 has a modifier of +2.

Some Foci and abilities may add bonuses or penalties to an at tribute’s base modifier.
Such bonuses or penalties cannot increase the modifier above +2 or below -2 unless explicitly indicated.
Some injuries or character advancements may alter an attribute score; this new score may change the attribute’s modifier.
