---
layout: default
title: Classes
parent: Character Creation
nav_order: 4
---

## 1.4.0 Classes

PCs are uncommon in that each of them has a **class**.
A class represents the particular skills, abilities, or talents that make the PC a viable adventurer.
NPCs do not normally have classes, though they may have special abilities or powers of their own.

### 1.4.1 The Three Base Classes

The three base classes are [Expert](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.8 The Expert), [Mage]({% link 1.0 Character Creation/1.5.0 Class List/1.5.12 The Mage.md %}), and [Warrior](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.18 The Warrior).
Each of these base classes has its own hit die, attack progression, and [Foci]({% link 1.0 Character Creation/1.6.0 Foci.md %}) advancement.
PCs use the tables for the class they choose.

### 1.4.2 Full and Partial Classes

There are two kinds of classes: Full classes and Partial classes.
A PC may choose to pick a single Full class, committing completely to that class’ profession, or they may choose to become an Adventurer and pick two Partial classes instead, mixing their abilities.

The [Warrior](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.18 The Warrior), [Expert](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.8 The Expert), [High Mage](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.10 The High Mage), [Necromancer](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.14 The Necromancer), [Invoker](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.11 The Invoker), and [Elementalist](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.7 The Elementalist) classes may be taken either as a Full class or as a Partial class.
In the former case, the PC gains the full range of powers granted to the profession.
If taken as a Partial class, a more restricted range of abilities are granted.

[The Healer](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.9 The Healer), [Vowed](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.17 The Vowed), [Bard](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.3 The Bard), [Thought Noble](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.16 The Thought Noble), and [Accursed](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.2 The Accursed) classes are also taken as a Partial class.
These classes are limited in scope, and must be paired with another Partial class.

### 1.4.3 The Adventurer Class

[The Adventurer](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.1 The Adventurer) is a special class that allows the PC to take two Partial classes and mix them together.
These may be Partial-only classes, such as a [Healer](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.9 The Healer)/[Vowed](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.17 The Vowed), or they may be Partial versions of [Warrior](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.18 The Warrior), [Expert](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.8 The Expert), or [Mage]({% link 1.0 Character Creation/1.5.0 Class List/1.5.12 The Mage.md %}) classes, such as a [Partial Expert](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.8 The Expert)/[Thought Noble](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.16 The Thought Noble).

A dual-specialization spellcaster is also possible by mixing a [Partial High Mage](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.10 The High Mage#1.5.10.1.2.3 Partial Other Mage)/[Partial Elementalist](1.5.0 Class List/1.5.7 The Elementalist#1.5.7.1.2.3 Partial Other Elementalist) together, for example.

### 1.4.4 Classes and Effort

Some classes have special abilities that are fueled with magical power, inner focus, or some other reserve of energy.
This capacity is measured in points of Effort, a resource the PC can commit to activate their abilities.

Every class that uses **Effort** has its own unique pool: High Mage Effort, Vowed Effort, Healer Effort, and so forth.
Adventurers with two Partial classes that use Effort have two separately-tracked pools, one for each class.
Points of Effort from one class cannot be used to fuel powers from another.

The maximum Effort of a Full class is equal to 1 plus a relevant skill level and ability modifier given by the class.
A Partial class uses the same formula, but with 1 fewer point of Effort, to a minimum of 1.

#### 1.4.4.1 Committing Effort

Most class powers require that Effort be Committed.
Committing Effort is done as part of activating a power, and ties up the Effort for a varying amount of time depending on the ability used.

Some powers **Commit Effort for the duration**.
This means the Effort remains Committed as long as the power is active.
The PC can reclaim the Committed Effort at any time as an Instant action, deactivating the power.

Some powers **Commit Effort for the scene**.
The Effort remains Committed until the end of the scene, after which it returns to the PC.
It cannot be reclaimed earlier, even if the ability it fuels is only good for a single attack or action.
A scene usually amounts to a single fight, event, or dungeon turn, almost never lasting more than fifteen minutes.
Further specifics are provided in the time section of the game rules.

Some powers **Commit Effort for the day**.
Once Committed, this Effort can be recovered only after a comfortable night’s rest.
If the PC is hungry, cold, sick, or sleeping without the benefits of a bedroll or other basic comforts, this Effort cannot be recovered.

Activating a power only ever requires Committing a single point of Effort, unless the power itself says otherwise.
