---
layout: default
title: Final Character Creation Steps
parent: Character Creation
nav_order: 7
---

## 1.7.0 Final Character Creation Steps

The player now records their character’s final statistics and chooses their name and current goal.

### 1.7.1 Record Maximum Hit Points

Your character’s hit points measure their distance from defeat or death.
If your character is reduced to zero hit points, they are either dying or incapacitated based on the nature of the injury.

A new character rolls the hit die for their class, adding their Constitution modifier to it.
If they have chosen the [Die Hard Focus]({% link 1.0 Character Creation/1.6.0 Foci.md %}) they may add +2 to the roll.
The final value for a given die cannot be less than 1 hit point.

A character gains hit points as they advance in character level, rerolling their prior levels and taking the new score if it’s higher, as explained in the rules section.

### 1.7.2 Record Attack Bonus

Your character has a certain degree of basic combat competence based on their class.
This bonus increases as you advance in character levels and is added to your attack roll.

A new character’s attack bonus is usually +0, though Full Warriors start with a +1 base attack bonus.

### 1.7.3 Record Saving Throws

When faced with unusual dangers such as fireball explosions, toxic darts, pit traps, or magical curses, the character may need to make a saving throw to resist or mitigate the peril.
Saving throws are rolled on a d20 and are explained in the rules section.

**Physical** saving throws are used to resist exhaustion, disease, poison, or other biological harms.
A new character’s Physical save target is equal to 15 minus the better of their Strength or Constitution modifiers.

**Evasion** saving throws are used to avoid explosions, traps, or other dangers requiring fast reactions.
A new character’s Evasion save target is equal to 15 minus the better of their Intelligence or Dexterity modifiers.

**Mental** saving throws are used to resist intangible spells, mental attacks, or other tests of willpower or self-control.
A new character’s Mental save target is equal to 15 minus the better of their Wisdom or Charisma modifiers.

**Luck** saving throws are rolled when facing a danger that only blind chance can spare them from, such as landslide, bridge collapse, or a sniper’s random choice of victims.
A new character’s Luck save target is always 15.

A character’s save targets all decrease by 1 point each time they advance an experience level.

### 1.7.4 Pick a Free Skill

Your character has developed some side interest that may be unrelated to your background or class.
You can pick any one skill of your choice.
This skill pick is gained at level-0, or level-1 if it’s already level-0.
You cannot pick a skill that is already at level-1.

### 1.7.5 Mages Choose Starting Spells

Spellcasting full [Mage]({% link 1.0 Character Creation/1.5.0 Class List/1.5.12 The Mage.md %}) begin play knowing four first-level spells and partial Mages begin play knowing two.
Adventurers with two partial spellcasting Mage classes, such as a partial Necromancer/partial High Mage know four.
These spells may be chosen from any spell list available to them.
A novice High Mage, for example, would pick first-level spells from the High Magic spell list, while a new Elementalist could pick them from either the High Magic or Elementalist spells.

### 1.7.6 Choose Starting Languages

Your PC begins play speaking the lingua franca of the campaign’s current city along with their native tongue if it happens to be different.
They also have fluency in additional languages based on their Know or Connect skills.
Either skill at level-0 grants one extra language, or two extra if it’s at level-1.
Thus, a PC with both Know-1 and Connect-1 skills could pick four additional languages.

PCs can learn additional languages to a conversational level by spending a few months immersed in it or studying it diligently during downtime.
Obtaining native fluency is at the GM’s discretion.

### 1.7.7 Choose Starting Gear

You can either pick a starting equipment package provided by your GM, or roll 3d6 x 10 to find out your starting silver pieces to spend on gear or keep in your pocket.
The starting packages will generally give you more equipment than the random roll would, but items can be swapped at the GM’s discretion.

### 1.7.8 Record Weapon and Armor Statistics

Now that you know what kind of weaponry or armor your hero has, take a moment to record the total hit bonus for your weaponry.
This is equal to your base attack bonus plus your relevant Stab, Shoot, or Punch skill, and the relevant attribute modifier for the weapon given on the weapon table.
If two attributes are listed for a weapon, use whichever is better for you.
If you lack even level-0 skill in the weapon, take a -2 hit penalty with it.

For each weapon’s damage and Shock, note down the information from the table.
You add your attribute modifier to both damage rolls and Shock.
Punch weapons or unarmed attacks can also add your Punch skill.

For your PC’s Armor Class, record the AC of the armor you usually wear.
Unarmored humans have an AC of 10.
Armor Class is modified by your Dexterity modifier.

### 1.7.9 Choose a Name and Goal

As final step, the player should pick a name and initial goal for the PC.
This goal can be anything so long as it gives a compelling reason for the PC to be seeking perilous adventure and associating with suspicious fellows.
The player must make up a good reason for the PC to be associating with the other players; it is not the GM’s job to justify the party’s existence, and if the player decides that their PC can’t reasonably run with the other party members it’s up to them to create a new character who can.
