---
layout: default
title: The Mageslayer
parent: Class List
grand_parent: Character Creation
nav_order: 13
---

### 1.5.13 The Mageslayer

Mageslayers are those specialist combatants who trade a more general proficiency in battle for certain special arts that make them exceptionally lethal against spellcasters.

#### Benefits Of The Mageslayer

The Mageslayer is a partial Warrior class that must be joined with a second partial class by an Adventurer.
As no Mage class is allowed to pair with this profession, this usually means a Partial Warrior/ Mageslayer or Partial Expert/Mageslayer.

Unlike the normal Partial Warrior class, Mageslayers do not get a bonus combat Focus at first level, nor do they grant a Partial Warrior’s +2 hit points per hit die.
If their other Partial class is Warrior, they gain these benefits normally.

All Mageslayers gain Magic-0 during character creation.
While it cannot be used for item creation or other magical pursuits, it allows them an intellectual understanding of their prey’s abilities.
Mageslayers gain special arts at first level and as they advance.

#### Spellcasters And Spells

Many Of These Arts Refer To “Casters” And “Spells”.
Each Of These Terms Has a Specific Definition For Mageslayers.

A “spell” is learned power that a creature casts with the usual spellcasting rules or an art used by a Mage class.
Magical effects created by portable magic items also count as spells, such as a wand that hurls fiery bolts, or an amulet that conjures impenetrable barriers.

Passive magical qualities, like the hit bonus of a magic sword, do not count as spells, nor do magical effects created by Workings or other large-scale edifices.
Neither are a magical creature’s innate supernatural powers or magical abilities that mimic specific spells.

A “caster” is any creature that is capable of casting spells using the usual spellcasting rules or triggering Mage class arts, whatever their brand of magic may be.

Potent as the Mageslayer’s arts may be, they are not strong enough to negate magic generated by gods, demi-divinities, or other quasi-divine entities.

#### 1.5.13.1 Mageslayer Arts

A Mageslayer has an Effort score equal to their Magic skill level plus their highest attribute modifier among Intelligence and Constitution, to a minimum of one point.
Mageslayer arts may be used in or out of armor, and require no free hands, incantations, or other overt actions, though some sects have favored prayers or oaths.

A Mageslayer gains their arts at a set rate, beginning with **Antimage** and **Magebane** at first level, and acquiring other talents as they gain experience.

- **Absolute Negation**: As an Instant action, Commit Effort for the day when you are about to be affected or impeded by an unwanted spell or a standing magical effect created by a spell.
  You may ignore the magic.
- **Antimage**: Get one level of the Nullifier Focus for free, or a free Focus if you somehow have both levels.
- **Dispel Enchantment**: As a Main Action, touch an ally and Commit Effort for the day.
  Your touch acts as an Extirpate Arcana spell.
  This art can only be applied to creatures, not objects, and can be applied to yourself or a given target only once per day.
- **Disrupt Sorcery**: As an On Turn action, Commit Effort for the scene.
  The next attack you make that round will leave the target unable to cast spells or trigger Mage arts for the rest of the round, even if the attack misses.
  Currently-active arts are not disrupted.
  If the attack is successfully Screened by an ally, however, the target is unaffected.
- **Immaculate Body**: Magical transformations, curses, or lingering negative magical penalties last a maximum of one scene on you.
  Such malisons cannot kill you, reducing you to 1 HP at worst.
  This applies to all magical effects, and not only to hostile spells.
- **Immaculate Mind**: You are impervious to unwanted mind-affecting or mind-reading spells or magical effects, and you automatically see through illusions and magical invisibility.
  Note that this applies to all such magical effects, not merely spells.
- **Know Your Prey**: Your Magic skill is treated as one point higher than it is, up to a maximum of level-4 skill.
  This benefit adds to your Effort as usual, and may allow you to have a higher Magic skill than your character level would usually allow.
- **Magebane**: You add half your level, rounded up, to all damage you inflict on casters from any source, be it by weapon, Shock, or violent action.
  This does not stack with a Warrior’s Killing Blow class ability.
- **Share the Pain**: As an Instant action, Commit Effort for the day when you are targeted by a hostile spell or are in its area of effect.
  Make a Mental saving throw; on a success, the spell’s caster is treated as also having affected by the spell that just targeted you.
  This art can be used only once per round.
- **Spellshield**: When a spell inflicts hit point damage on you, it’s automatically halved, rounded down, before any saves or resistances are applied.
- **Ward Ally**: As an Instant action, Commit Effort for the scene when an ally within thirty feet is affected by a spell; you are affected by the spell in place of your ally.
  If you are both in the same area of effect, the spell hits you twice.
  Any defenses or arts you have against sorcery may be applied as usual to this transferred effect.
- **Witchfinder**: As a Main Action, Commit Effort for the scene.
  For the rest of the scene, you gain the benefits of the Apprehend the Arcane Form spell, except for the spell’s dark-vision ability.

#### Partial Expert/Mageslayer

| Level | Hit Dice | Attack Bonus | Focus Picks        |
| ----: | -------: | -----------: | ------------------ |
|     1 |      1d6 |           +1 | 1 Expert<br>+1 Any |
|     2 |      2d6 |           +2 | +1 Any             |
|     3 |      3d6 |           +2 |                    |
|     4 |      4d6 |           +3 |                    |
|     5 |      5d6 |           +4 | +1 Any             |
|     6 |      6d6 |           +5 |                    |
|     7 |      7d6 |           +5 | +1 Any             |
|     8 |      8d6 |           +6 |                    |
|     9 |      9d6 |           +6 |                    |
|    10 |     10d6 |           +7 | +1 Any             |

#### Partial Warrior/Mageslayer

| Level | Hit Dice | Attack Bonus | Focus Picks         |
| ----: | -------: | -----------: | ------------------- |
|     1 |    1d6+2 |           +1 | 1 Warrior<br>+1 Any |
|     2 |    2d6+4 |           +2 | +1 Any              |
|     3 |    3d6+6 |           +3 |                     |
|     4 |    4d6+8 |           +4 |                     |
|     5 |   5d6+10 |           +5 | +1 Any              |
|     6 |   6d6+12 |           +6 |                     |
|     7 |   7d6+14 |           +7 | +1 Any              |
|     8 |   8d6+16 |           +8 |                     |
|     9 |   9d6+18 |           +9 |                     |
|    10 |  10d6+20 |          +10 | +1 Any              |

#### Mageslayer Art Progression

| Level | Arts Gained at This Level |
| ----: | ------------------------: |
|     1 |        Antimage, Magebane |
|     2 |  Witchfinder, Spellshield |
|     3 |           Disrupt Sorcery |
|     4 |            Know Your Prey |
|     5 |            Share the Pain |
|     6 |        Dispel Enchantment |
|     7 |                 Ward Ally |
|     8 |           Immaculate Body |
|     9 |           Immaculate Mind |
|    10 |         Absolute Negation |
