---
layout: default
title: The Healer
parent: Class List
grand_parent: Character Creation
nav_order: 9
---

### 1.5.9 The Healer

The Healer is a partial Mage class that does not use spells.
Instead, they gain specific arts that allow them to mend wounds, cure illnesses, and otherwise sustain their allies.

#### Healer Benefits

The Healer class exists only as a partial Mage class, to be taken by an Adventurer along with another partial class.
Thus, a Partial Warrior/Partial Healer might be a grizzled combat medic, a Partial Expert/Partial Healer might be an erudite physician gifted in both mundane and magical healing methods, and a Partial Necromancer/Partial Healer might be an adept of life and death.

All Healers gain Heal as a bonus skill, acquiring it at level-0, or level-1 if they already have it at level-0.
A basic grounding in mundane healing techniques is necessary in order to learn their more sophisticated magical arts.

Healers do not learn how to cast spells.
Instead, they focus on their special arcane healing arts.
Wielding these arts usually requires nothing more than touching the target and concentrating on the desired effect, and the process is direct and simple enough to perform even when burdened by armor or carrying a shield.

These arts are usually quite subtle, and don’t produce visible or audible indications of their use.

At first level, a Healer gains the **Healing Touch** art and can pick one more of their choice.
As they advance in levels afterwards, they can learn new arts.
Once chosen, an art is permanent and cannot be exchanged.

#### 1.5.9.1 Healer Arts

Healer Effort is calculated with Heal rather than Magic, with each PC’s maximum being equal to their Heal skill level plus the better of their Intelligence or Charisma modifiers, to a minimum of one point.

All Healers are trained in the **Healing Touch** art, but may develop other techniques with time.

- **Healing Touch**: Commit Effort for the scene as an Instant action; for the rest of the scene, you may heal 2d6 damage plus your Heal skill to a touched ally as a Main Action.
  This healing adds 1 System Strain to the target each time it is applied.

#### Other Healer Arts

- **Empowered Healer**: Your Healing Touch becomes more powerful, adding your level to any healing.
- **Facile Healer**: Your Healing Touch ability is improved;, and you no longer need to Commit Effort to activate it.
- **Far Healer**: Your Healing Touch ability is improved, and may be used on a visible target within ten feet per character level.
- **Final Repose**: Target a visible living creature and Commit Effort for the day as an Instant action.
  For the rest of the scene, they take a Physical saving throw penalty equal to your Heal skill.
  If they are reduced to zero hit points before the end of the scene, they die with no chance for stabilization or revival.
- **Healer’s Eye**: Commit Effort as an On Turn action; while the Effort remains committed, you can use a Main Action to visually detect diseases and poisons, diagnose creatures flawlessly, perceive their physiology, and learn their current hit point totals.
  As a side effect, you can detect living creatures by sight regardless of available light or obscuring mists.
- **Limb Restoration**: Only expert healers can master this art, which cannot be learned earlier than 8th level.
  You must Commit all remaining Effort for the day, a minimum of one point, to regenerate a missing limb or organ for a target you are touching, or efface some dramatic scar or other physical debility.
  The target’s System Strain is automatically maximized.
- **Purge Ailment**: Commit Effort for the day as a Main Action.
  An ally you are touching is cured of one poison or disease.
  Creatures killed by poison can be revived by this art if it is used within six minutes of death.
  Magical poisons and diseases may require a Wis/Heal or Cha/Heal skill check against a difficulty of 8 or more.
  At seventh level, you need only Commit Effort for the scene to use this ability.
- **Refined Restoration**: You and up to a dozen allies you tend be fore they sleep will all lose 2 System Strain from a good night’s rest instead of 1.
- **Revive the Fallen**: Only expert healers are capable of mastering this art, which cannot be learned earlier than 8th level.
  Commit Effort for the day as a Main Action to revive a recently-slain living creature that you are touching.
  This ability must be used on a target within one minute per caster level of their death, and will not work on a corpse that has been dismembered, incinerated, or otherwise disjected.
  The target’s System Strain is automatically maximized and they’ll be unconscious for twenty-four hours after their restoration before awakening with 1 hit point.
- **Swift Healer**: Your Healing Touch ability is improved, and may be used as an On Turn action once per day per character level, though not more than once per round on any given target.
- **The Healer’s Knife**: Your Healing Touch ability is altered, and may be used to inflict damage to a living target instead of healing it.
  The damage done is equivalent to the healing that would normally be done, albeit you receive 1 System Strain instead of the target.
  Using this power in melee requires a successful Punch attack with a hit bonus equal to your Heal skill, with the damage added to any done by the blow, or simply touching an unwary target.
  Ranged use with Far Healer is impossible with this art.
- **Tireless Vigor**: Commit Effort; while it remains Committed your need to eat, drink, breathe, or sleep does not grow further.
  You may exert yourself tirelessly and regenerate 1 lost hit point per hour.
- **Vital Furnace**: Your tremendous life energy can be used to instantly regenerate any non-mortal wound you have received.
  Commit Effort for the day as an Instant action to negate the damage from an injury you just received that did not reduce you to zero hit points.
  Aside from this ability, you automatically stabilize if reduced to zero hit points and awaken ten minutes later with 1 hit point.
  This ability cannot undo damage you intentionally inflict on yourself via some power or magical exchange.

#### Partial Expert/Healer

| Level | Hit Dice | Attack Bonus | Focus Picks        |
| ----: | -------: | -----------: | ------------------ |
|     1 |      1d6 |           +0 | 1 Expert<br>+1 Any |
|     2 |      2d6 |           +1 | +1 Any             |
|     3 |      3d6 |           +1 |                    |
|     4 |      4d6 |           +2 |                    |
|     5 |      5d6 |           +2 | +1 Any             |
|     6 |      6d6 |           +3 |                    |
|     7 |      7d6 |           +3 | +1 Any             |
|     8 |      8d6 |           +4 |                    |
|     9 |      9d6 |           +4 |                    |
|    10 |     10d6 |           +5 | +1 Any             |

#### Partial Mage/Healer

| Level | Hit Dice | Attack Bonus | Focus Picks |
| ----: | -------: | -----------: | ----------- |
|     1 |    1d6-1 |           +0 | 1 Any       |
|     2 |    2d6-2 |           +0 | +1 Any      |
|     3 |    3d6-3 |           +0 |             |
|     4 |    4d6-4 |           +0 |             |
|     5 |    5d6-5 |           +1 | +1 Any      |
|     6 |    6d6-6 |           +1 |             |
|     7 |    7d6-7 |           +1 | +1 Any      |
|     8 |    8d6-8 |           +1 |             |
|     9 |    9d6-9 |           +1 |             |
|    10 |  10d6-10 |           +2 | +1 Any      |

#### Partial Warrior/Healer

| Level | Hit Dice | Attack Bonus | Focus Picks         |
| ----: | -------: | -----------: | ------------------- |
|     1 |    1d6+2 |           +1 | 1 Warrior<br>+1 Any |
|     2 |    2d6+4 |           +2 | +1 Any              |
|     3 |    3d6+6 |           +2 |                     |
|     4 |    4d6+8 |           +3 |                     |
|     5 |   5d6+10 |           +4 | +1 Any              |
|     6 |   6d6+12 |           +5 |                     |
|     7 |   7d6+14 |           +5 | +1 Any              |
|     8 |   8d6+16 |           +6 |                     |
|     9 |   9d6+18 |           +6 |                     |
|    10 |  10d6+20 |           +7 | +1 Any              |

#### Healer Arts

| Level |               Arts Gained |
| ----: | ------------------------: |
|     1 | Healing Touch and Any One |
|     2 |                   Any One |
|     3 |                           |
|     4 |                   Any One |
|     5 |                   Any One |
|     6 |                   Any One |
|     7 |                           |
|     8 |                   Any One |
|     9 |                           |
|    10 |                   Any One |
