---
layout: default
title: Armor
parent: Equipment, Armor, and Weapons
nav_order: 4
---

## 3.4.0 Armor

While some martial adepts or tradition-bound sorcerers shun armor, most adventurers find it necessary to put something solid between them and their enemies.

Armor must be worn as a Readied item, counting against the hero’s encumbrance limit.
Each type of armor grants a different base Armor Class to the wearer, making it more difficult for enemies to land a telling blow.
This Armor Class is modified by the wearer’s Dexterity modifier and by any shield they might carry, as described below.
Multiple suits of armor do not stack; only one can usefully benefit a wearer.

A hero wearing no armor at all has a base Armor Class of 10, modified by their Dexterity modifier.
If they pick up a shield they can improve this to either AC 13 or AC 14, depending on the size of the shield.

### 3.4.1 Light, Medium, and Heavy Armor

**Light armor** may be decidedly heavy, but it is loose and flexible enough to offer minimal hindrance to the wearer’s actions.
Some varieties are also discreet enough to be worn politely in common society. **Medium armor** is significantly noisier and more overt; it cannot be worn discreetly and applies its encumbrance as a penalty to any physical Sneak rolls made by the wearer. **Heavy armor** is the thickest, toughest panoply available on the market, and its bulk and noise make its encumbrance apply as a penalty to Sneak or Exert checks made by the wearer.

### 3.4.2 Shields

**Shields** come in two general varieties.
Small ones, often made of costlier metal, can be strapped to the wearer’s arm and allow them to hold and manipulate objects with that hand, albeit not wield a weapon with it.
Larger shields are of cheaper wood and require a good grip.

A small shield user has a base AC of 13, while a large shield user has a base AC of 14.
Unlike other armor, however, if the user is already wearing equal or better armor the shield grants a +1 bonus to their AC.
Shields allow the bearer to ignore the first instance of Shock they might otherwise suffer in a round.

### 3.4.3 Types of Armor

**War shirts** are nothing more than blessed shirts, lucky cloaks, auspicious warpaint, or whatever tokens of martial victory are favored by the poor and humble of a given culture.
While they may look like nothing but normal clothing, their war-luck is still sufficient to interfere with a spellcaster’s abilities.

**Buff coats** are long coats of thick, supple hide, sometimes worn to cushion the bite of heavier armor and sometimes sported as ornamented street clothing for the gentry who can afford such luxuries. **Linothorax armor** is a stiffer armor of glued, layered cloth.

A **war robe** is a catchall term for various outfits involving layers of reinforced cloth or leather.
Bits of metal, layers of thick hide, or weaves of tough cordage might all go into the various layers of the suit, making it a very heavy, if effective, piece of equipment.

**Pieced armor** is assembled of a thicker or more durable chest piece and piecework limb armor.
While less effective than a proper cuirass and greaves, it’s often the best that poor adventurers can get.

**Mail shirts** are usually of iron or steel wire, though bronze and other more exotic materials are not unknown.
Such shirts cover only the vitals of the wearer, but are less burdensome than a full hauberk.

**Cuirass and greave armor** reflects those different designs that rely on solid metal plating over the wearer’s vitals along with lighter limb armor. **Scaled armor** includes both armor of metal scales on a flexible backing, brigandine, jacks of plate, and other armor made up of small, connected plates that cover most of the wearer’s body.
Most are noisy, heavy suits.

A **mail hauberk** in the listed style covers not only the wearer’s chest, but also their arms, with a long skirt extended to the knee. **Plate armor** is an extremely expensive suit of tailored metal pieces that cover both the vitals and the limbs of the wearer. **Great armor** is less finely tailored, relying instead on stacking layer upon layer of mail, plates, hide, cloth, and other protective materials.

**Grand plate** is so finely-jointed that a weapon must either be very large or very armor-piercing to harm the wearer; they’re immune to non-magical melee or thrown weapons unless the weapon is two-handed, has a Shock rating of AC 16 or more, or the wearer is currently grappled by someone.
This tight protection comes at the cost of the thick plating found in great armor or conventional plate.

#### Armor

| Light Armors |  AC |   Cost | Enc |
| ------------ | --: | -----: | --: |
| No Armor     |  10 |   None | N/A |
| War Shirt    |  11 |   5 sp |   0 |
| Buff Coat    |  12 |  50 sp |   0 |
| Linothorax   |  13 |  20 sp |   1 |
| War Robe     |  14 |  50 sp |   3 |
| Pieced Armor |  14 | 100 sp |   2 |

| Medium Armors       |  AC |   Cost | Enc |
| ------------------- | --: | -----: | --: |
| Mail Shirt          |  14 | 250 sp |   1 |
| Cuirass and Greaves |  15 | 250 sp |   2 |
| Scaled Armor        |  16 | 500 sp |   3 |

| Heavy Armors |  AC |     Cost | Enc |
| ------------ | --: | -------: | --: |
| Mail Hauberk |  16 |   750 sp |   2 |
| Plate Armor  |  17 | 1,000 sp |   2 |
| Great Armor  |  19 | 2,000 sp |   3 |
| Grand Plate  |  16 | 2,000 sp |   3 |

| Shield       |  AC |  Cost | Enc |
| ------------ | --: | ----: | --: |
| Small Shield |  13 | 20 sp |   1 |
| Large Shield |  14 | 10 sp |   1 |
